What I Like About 'Old Man and The Sea'

The endless oceans and the tiny boat. The short time window of the novel (several days) in contrast with the grand traversals of long ago memories. The micro/macro duality in time and space forces us to confront the most profound perplexities of the human condition. Why are we here? What is the meaning of achievement? How will our glories be remembered, and does it matter if they are remembered at all? We must believe our actions matter if we are to continue our fight for flourishing existence. Yet it is hard not to question if there is any significance in the fight at all. A starkly literal interpretation of the heat death of the universe would favour the latter viewpoint (thought it is one I do not endorse).

I first read the book when I was 18. Although I enjoyed it then, now that I am a month away from 30 the theme of temporal duality has increased in poignance.

It doesn't just force us to confront these perplexities, it attempts to spur us on in our confrontation. To embolden us in all the many fights of our existence. Of course, the old man Santiago is our emotional anchor here.

Writing these thoughts, I'm charmingly haunted by an aspect of Hemingway's creative process; I imagine him flicking citrus peel into an open fire and gleaning inspiration from the scented blue flames it reciprocated. In one way, the grand fish that Santiago chases in his final days serves as a good metaphor for artistic expression. Although one always fights to deliver it to the world as clearly as it is seen in the mind's eye, the fleshy vitality of original inspiration doesn't always endure. Just as the grand fish's glistening musculature is ripped off on the way back to shore, leaving only a bare skeleton on the beach.

It was Hemingway's last major fictional work and with hindsight, I wonder whether perhaps Hemingway imbued something of himself in the old man. Perhaps somewhere within, he knew that this would be his last great tussle with creative expression. His final round in La Lucha.